 In the matter of CITY PRESS                                                                                                         APPLICANT AND MNCEDISI NDLOVU AND SEDUMEDI ATTORNEYS                            RESPONDENT MATTER NO: 7720/01/2020 DECISION ON APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO APPEAL  4.1.1 “Top law firm Mncedisi Ndlovu Sedumedi (MNS) which is investigating state capture at Transnet, has been linked                                      to alleged kickbacks involving a former board member of the parastatal in an audio recording ...”. The Ombud found                                          that the statement was in breach of clauses 1.1, 1.2 and 1.3 of the Code. 4.1.2 “The recording appears to be of a suspicious conversation that casts doubt on the lawfulness of appointing MNS                                        to assist Transnet….” This statement was found by the Ombud to be in breach of clauses 1.1, 1.2 and 1.3. 4.1.3 “The discussion also deals with an unexplained payment of R2.2 million by MNS to Radebe, who allegedly                                                initiated the appointment of MNS at the parastatal.” The Ombud held that the use of the word “payment” and the                                                mentioning of the MNS’s name in that regard were in breach of clauses 1.1, 1.2 and 1.3. A sanction was then imposed, which included an apology. The applicant now seeks leave to appeal. The application is opposed by the respondent. “1.     City Press submits that the golden rule to the interpretation of any text is that the literal meaning must be adopted if the words are clear and unambiguous. 2.      The Press Ombudsman does not tell us why the literal meaning of (a statement taken from the tape) on its own, is so unclear and ambiguous such that its literal meaning could not be accepted. 3.      We agree that where words are unclear and ambiguous context would have to considered in order to come to a reasonable interpretation, but the foreground to that is that a compelling case must be made why the words on their own are unclear and ambiguous. The Press Ombudsman never even used the words unclear or ambiguous in the ruling, or even any word with a similar meaning”. Apart from the issue of literal interpretation, there is also the issue of context. The applicants says the following in reaction to the above statement: “1.   We submit here that the Press Ombudsman is inconsistent. On the one hand he demands context, but when City Press points out that at the time of writing the publication had in its possession a response from Mr Ndlovu, in which he confirmed that it was ‘common knowledge’ that the appointment of MNS was doubted by some, the Press Ombudsman finds this context irrelevant. 2.    The Press Ombudsman cannot cherry pick which context suits his interpretation. The fact that City Press had the response form Mr Ndlovu at the time of writing is sufficient to establish the context within which the newspaper finalised its report. 3.    More so, this comment from MNS is included in the story and it cannot be excluded from the contextual analysis simply because it doesn’t suit the interpretation of the Press Ombud.” The issue is not, at this stage, whether or not the applicant is correct; but whether or not it has reasonable prospects of success – not whether it will succeed. Dated this 24th day of August 2020 Judge B M Ngoepe, Chair, Appeals Panel 