 Finding Complaint 4214 Date of article September 23, 2018 Headline: “Cyril accused of double standards.” Author: Matumo Letsoalo Page: Online: Yes Particulars This finding is based on a written complaint from the legal representatives of Mr Thabang Makwetla, a written reply from M&G deputy editor Beauregard Tromp, and further written replies to the Ombud’s queries by Mr Tromp. Complaint Mr Makwetla, at the time the article was published, the Deputy Correctional Services Minister, through his legal representatives, complains that an article in the M&G that reported that he had “confessed” at an ANC national executive committee meeting that he had received a cash “bribe” of more than one million rands which he had returned to an unknown business six weeks later. Mr Makwetla’s legal representatives complained that the article was inaccurate, fabricated and defamatory to him “as it painted him out to be a person who received or received and accepts cash bribes”. Although not specified, the complaint suggest that the following clauses of the Press Code were transgressed: 1.3  It then goes on to report that Ace Magashule’s supporters are “angry” about an “attack on him by President Cyril Ramaphosa over rumours of his involvement in meetings to plot the president’s removal.” The article said they planned to use Mr Makwetla’s “confession” as an example of “selective persecution” of the leaders who did not support him (Mr Ramaphosa). 1.4 It quotes Mr Makwetla’s spokesperson, Ntime Skhosana, saying: “If anything, that’s an ethical stand worthy to be celebrated by upright activists and society in general, notwithstanding the fact that the source’s account is riddled with inaccuracies.” Specifically he questioned the six weeks “it allegedly took Makwetla to return the money”. 1.5 He then adds “in respect of party discipline, we prefer not to express unauthorized comments in internal party discussions”, and refers the newspaper to the ANC Secretary-General. 1.6 Mr Makwetla also declined to comment. He is described as a “vocal critic of former president Jacob Zuma”. 1.7 The article notes that the then ANC spokesperson Pule Mabe did not respond to requests for comment. 1.8 There is then some analysis/speculation in the article, noting that the “pro-Magashule” group will use “Ramaphosa’s inaction against senior ANC politicians who benefited” from alleged bribes from the Bosasa group as “evidence of selective persecution”. It recaps how the company, now known as African Global Operations, allegedly  installed security facilities for various ministers and ANC politicians. It notes that this grouping “will also raise concerns at the NEC meeting about the use of state resources to investigate” Ace Magashule, former Free State premier. 1.9 It goes on to recount Mr Ramaphosa’s condemnation of apparently secret meetings (reported previously) of those who were opposed to his presidency, and his call for unity. 1.10 It describes what can broadly be called the “anti-Ramaphosa” camp of accusing his supporters of also holding “secret meetings” and the  “marginalisation” of some. 1.11 It quotes ANC leaders sympathetic to President Ramaphosa as saying he was correct to condemn the secret meeting held by Ace Magashule and Supra Mahumapelo with former president Jacob Zuma, as well as to promote “organisational renewal.” 2.10 The contact person at the office of the attorneys also changed during this time making for very delayed correspondence. Moreover, they said they could not consult with their client as he was in Parliament at the time. 2.11 After they did not respond to many reminders, this complaint was put aside until such time as they did. 2.12  I did get a response to my queries from the M&G, but by the end of 2019 I still had no response from Mr Makwetla’s attorneys. 2.13 Thus I have decided to try to settle this complaint in any event in the interests of fairness and of closure. Mdhluli, Pearce & Mdizikwa for Mr Makwetla Mail&Guardian 3.13 In his initial response, Mr Tromp argued that the newspaper had “fully reflected”  Mr Makwetla’s views both in the story itself and in the fairly lengthy right of reply published as a letter. The paper had also offered him an interview. In correspondence with Mr Latakgomo this was confirmed. 3.14 In email correspondence with myself, Mr Tromp, the deputy editor gave a more substantial reply. 3.15 He said even by Mr Makwetla’s own account, he was offered a bribe. “He speaks of his initial reluctance and refusal when offered the bribe (information that was not available to us for the original article).  Regardless, he is left with the moneys concerned, which he then returns at some later stage.” 3.16 “The receipt or possession of said moneys then surely cannot mean anything other than him having received the bribe.” But in the opening sentence of the article, it is reported that he returned the money.  According to the article it was six weeks after this “bribe” was received.  The question mark over this time period is recorded in the quote from Mr Makwetla’s spokesperson, Ntime Skhosana,. 3.17 However, in neither his reply, nor the lawyer’s letter, is the six week period disputed. 3.18 On the questions of balance and fairness, Mr Tromp argues: “The thrust of the article is clearly to discuss the factional battles that were and continue to take place within the ANC. There is a concerted effort to contextualise the state of play, with supporters of ANC secretary-general Ace Magashule planning a push back against president Cyril Ramaphosa. The article explains that Makwetla's admissions regarding the bribe would  form part of that push back. “ 3.19 He argues that political reporting requires “a constant balancing act, with the reporter inevitably finding themselves in conversation with players with clear political intent. It is the task of the journalist and editors concerned to ensure that they remain informed and balanced, to ensure that the reporting is offered without fear, nor favour. At times when popular narratives take hold, this is especially difficult.” 3.20 Mr Tromp argues that the newspaper has “had carefully considered the forces at play within the factional battles of the ANC, and provided a balanced report. This we have done prior to and subsequent to the publication of this report and will continue to do.” 3.21 He also notes that after the article was published the newspaper was contacted by Mr Makwetla. It “immediately” offered him a right of reply “which we published in the very next edition of the newspaper and online, after receipt.” 3.22 There were no further substantive arguments, partly because Mr Makwetla’s attorneys did not respond to my questions as they said he himself was unavailable, being in Parliament, and partly because in its initial response, they re-confirmed they wanted the matter to go for adjudication. Finding In the light of the above, the complaint is dismissed. Appeal The Complaints Procedures lay down that within seven (7) working days of receipt of this decision, either party may apply for leave to appeal to the Chairperson of the SA Press Appeals Panel, Judge Bernard Ngoepe, fully setting out the grounds of appeal. He can be contacted at Khanyim@ombudsman.org.za. Pippa Green Press Ombudsman March 31, 2020          